Add the canary deployment blog (#44326)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-13-Canary-Deployment-With-Kubernetes/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "A Comprehensive Guide to Canary Deployment with Kubernetes"
date: 2023-12-13
slug: canary-deployment-with-kubernetes
evergreen: true
---

> **Author**: Mohammed Affan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: >
  Mohammed Affan
```
According to PR #45865, the author metadata now uses this syntax.

> ## Introduction:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We don't start articles with a heading such as “Introduction”.

Welcome to a comprehensive guide to canary deployment with kubernetes.
In modern software development getting the quick feedback form the users
is crucial for delivering a high quality product and implementing agile
delivery. Developers try to get feedback from the users without ruining the
user experience. That's where canary deployment comes into the picture.

## Prerequisites:

- You need to have a Kubernetes cluster (minikube would also work).
- You also need to have `kubectl` installed on the local machine - see [install tools](/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You also need to have a basic understanding of service mesh and some sort of familiarity with Istio.

```
I think reader needs to have some sort of prior familiarity with Istio for following this blog.

Author: Thanks for the review.

However I think a beginner can also follow this guide with no familiarity with Istio at all. A user will get familiar with Istio in the blog itself.

feedback without ruining the user experience you decided to send the 90% of your traffic
to the App v1 and 10% of the traffic to the App v2. This type of weighted deployment
method is known as the canary deployment.

{{< figure src="canary-deployment.png" alt="Illustration of canary deployment where 90% of the traffic is going towards the app v1 and the 10% of the traffic going towards the app v2" >}}

## Deploying the app:

Let's deploy the stable and canary versions of the app. The
[canary-app](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/affan7/canary-app/general)
repository contains two docker images. One is the canary-app:v1 which is the
stable version of the app. And the other image is canary-app:v2 which is the
canary version of the app.

To deploy the app, create a `deployment.yaml` manifest file with the following
configuration.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: canary-app-deployment
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: canary-app
      version: v1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: canary-app
        version: v1
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: canary-app

>         image: affan7/canary-app:v1

Reviewer 2: - Why this image?
- How can we be sure this image will be maintained indefinitely?

Author: I wonder which image should I use?

Author: > I wonder which image should I use?

Hi @sftim can you please help me here?

Reviewer 2: Try looking for an example application that is likely to stay published (for example, from an open source project, rather than from an individual).

---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: canary-app-deployment-v2
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: canary-app
      version: v2
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: canary-app
        version: v2
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: canary-app

>         image: affan7/canary-app:v2

Reviewer 2: - Why this image?
- How can we be sure this image will be maintained indefinitely?

---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: canary-app-service
spec:
  type: NodePort
  selector:
    app: canary-app
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 3000
      targetPort: 80
```

> This Kubernetes manifest deploys two different apps, `canary-app:v1`, `canary-app:v2`
> and a single service for both of the apps. The service is exposed via a `NodePort`.
> 
> Use the following command to access the service.

Reviewer 2: This Kubernetes manifest deploys two different apps, `canary-app:v1`, `canary-app:v2`
and a single Service for both of the apps. The Service is exposed via a `NodePort`.

```suggestion
Use the following command to access the different Pods that make up the running app:
```

```bash

> for i in {1..10}; do curl <url of the nodeport service>; done

Reviewer 2: Try this:
```suggestion
# You need to use bash for this to work
# Also, change the next line to put in the real URL of the Service
for i in {1..10}; do curl <url of the nodeport service>; done
```

```

Note: If you are using the minikube, you can get the url of your `NodePort`
service by running the `minikube service canary-app-service --url` command.

After running this command you will get a similar output like the following.

{{< figure src="equally-distributed-traffic.png" alt="A screenshot of a terminal window with a code snippet and output text. The code snippet is written in Bash and the code is looping through a range of numbers and making a cURL request to the server. The output text shows the equal number of server responses from two different servers. The response contains the strings 'Hello from app-v1' 5 times and the 'Hello from app-v2' 5 times." >}}

> The kubernetes tries to equally distribute the traffic across the pods, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes networking tries to equally distribute the traffic across the pods, and
```

for the canary-app:v1. The 90% of the traffic will go towards the
`canary-app:v1` and the remaining 10% traffic will go towards the
`canary-app:v2`.

Here is the output after changing the value:

{{< figure src="splitted-traffic.png" alt="A screenshot of a terminal window with a code snippet and output text. The code snippet is written in Bash and the code is looping through a range of numbers and making a cURL request to the server. The output shows the traffic split between the servers in a 9:1 ratio. The response contains the strings 'Hello from app-v1' 9 times and the 'Hello from app-v2' a single time." >}}

You can see that the 90% of traffic is flowing towards the app-v1 and the
10% traffic is going towards the app-v2 and that's a canary deployment.

Now consider the case where you want to send just 1% of the traffic to the canary
version of the app. You would need to create 99 pod replicas for the stable version
of your app and a single pod for the canary version of the app. That doesn't
seems efficient. That's why Istio comes into the picture. Istio is a more
sophisticated solution to address these types of issues.

> Before moving forward with Istio, change back the values of the `replicas` to the `1`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before moving forward with Istio, change the value of `replicas` back to `1`
```

> for the canary-app:v1. And change the service type from the `NodePort` to the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for the canary-app:v1. Change the service type from `NodePort` to
```

> `ClusterIP`. Because you will be exposing the service using Istio instead of using the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`ClusterIP`, as you will be exposing the service using Istio instead of using the
```

> node port. Also change the value of service port to the `80` from the `3000` for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
node port. Also change the service port value to `80` from `3000` for
```

> the convenience.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
convenience.
```

## What is Istio?

> Istio is an open source service mesh platform that helps you connect, monitor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Istio](https://www.cncf.io/projects/istio/) is an open source service mesh platform that helps you connect, monitor
```

> and secure the communication between your microservices. Istio makes sure

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and secure the communication between your microservices. It ensures
```

> that a microservice have the access to communicate with other microservices.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that a microservice has access to communicate with other microservices.
```

It adds a layer of control and visibility to your microservices architecture,
making it easier to manage the complexity that comes with the distributed
systems.

> ## Installing Istio:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Installing Istio
```

> Once you have an active Kubernetes cluster and the `kubectl` is configured to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once you have an active Kubernetes cluster `kubectl` is configured to
```

communicate with the cluster. You can proceed to install Istio. For installing Istio
refer to the [Istio getting started](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/)
documentation.

> ## Deploying Istio gateway:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deploying Istio gateway
```

> To make Istio service mesh is accessible from outside the cluster, you need to create
> an Istio gateway. Create a file named istio.yaml for deploying Istio gateway and configure
> it like the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make Istio service mesh is accessible from outside the cluster, you need to define
an Istio gateway. Create a manifest file named `istio.yaml` with the following content:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: canary-gateway
spec:
  selector:
    istio: ingressgateway
  servers:
  - port:
      number: 80
      name: http
      protocol: HTTP
    hosts:
    - "*"
```

> In the hosts field a wildcard `*` symbol is specified. This allows for the service

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the hosts field a wildcard `*` symbol is specified. This allows the service
```

to be accessible from any domain name or IP address. In production environment this
should be a fully qualified domain name such as `www.example.com`.

## Creating a virtual service and destination rule

An Istio virtual service is used to implement the traffic routing inside a Kubernetes
cluster. The Istio virtual service defines a set of rules for how network traffic
should be routed to different destination services. It allows you to control the
traffic routing, apply timeouts, retries and utilize some other features. Think of it

> as a way to define the rules for how request to a particular service should be handled

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
as a way to define the rules for how requests to a particular service should be handled
```

within the Istio service mesh.

You can use the virtual service to route a percentage of traffic to the new version of an
app for testing purposes, apply different routing rules based on request headers,
or define fault injection policies.

> Add the following lines to your istio.yaml file.

Reviewer 2: I would make a separate manifest for this.

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: canary-app-virtual-service
spec:
  hosts:
    - "*"
  gateways:
    - canary-gateway
  http:
  - route:
    - destination:
        host: canary-app-service.default.svc.cluster.local
        subset: v1
      weight: 90
    - destination:
        host: canary-app-service.default.svc.cluster.local
        subset: v2
      weight: 10
```

> You can see that here the `canary-gateway` is specified in the virtual service. Specifying

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here you can see that the `canary-gateway` is specified in the virtual service. Specifying
```

the gateway makes the service accessible from outside the cluster. Here is a breakdown of
the `route.destination.host` field.

- `canary-app-service`: This is the name of the service of the app.
- `default`: This is the namespace in which the service resides. In this case, it's the default namespace.
- `svc`: It stands for "service" and is a standard suffix for Kubernetes services.
- `cluster.local`: This is the default cluster domain in Kubernetes.

The `weight` field defines the routing weight of the requests. The `subset` field allows

> you to specify a destination for the requests specified via a `DestinationRule` resource.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
you to specify a destination for requests specified via a `DestinationRule` resource.
```

> Create and add a `DestinationRule` resource into the istio.yaml file.

Reviewer 2: I would make a separate manifest for this.

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: canary-app
spec:
  host: canary-app-service
  subsets:
  - name: v1
    labels:
      version: v1
  - name: v2
    labels:
      version: v2
```

The `DestinationRule` resource defines `subsets`. The `subsets` allow you to
define a group of pods as a destination for the incoming requests using pod labels.

> Now apply the istio.yaml using the following command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now apply the `istio.yaml` manifest, using the following commands:
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f istio.yaml
```

> After applying the istio.yaml use the following command to get the external IP of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After applying `istio.yaml`, use the following command to get the external IP address of the
```

Istio ingress gateway load balancer.

```shell  
kubectl get svc -n istio-system
```

Note: If you are using the minikube, and the external IP of the load balancer is in the
pending state use the `minikube tunnel` command. Running this command will provide an
external IP for your load balancer. And if you are using the `kind` to create the

> kubernetes cluster. You would need to install the [MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes cluster, you would need to install the [MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/installation/).
```

> Copy the external IP of the load balancer and paste that into your browser, and specify

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Copy the external IP of the load balancer and paste that into your browser, specifying
```

> the port `80`. You will see the output of the app. And if you refresh the page several

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
port `80`. You will see the output of the app. And if you refresh the page several
```

> times you'd be able to see that the traffic is distributed in a 9:1 ratio. You can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
times you'll see that the traffic is distributed in a 9:1 ratio. You can
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions, I will get back to it in my free time :sweat_smile:

---
layout: blog
title: "A Comprehensive Guide to Canary Deployment with Kubernetes"
date: 2024-09-14
slug: canary-deployment-with-kubernetes
evergreen: true
author: >
  Mohammed Affan (AccuKnox)
---

Welcome to a comprehensive guide to canary deployment with Kubernetes.
In modern software development getting quick feedback form the users
is crucial for delivering a high-quality product and implementing agile
delivery. Developers try to get feedback from the users without ruining the

> user experience. That's why canary deployment come into the picture.

Reviewer 2: Either we should mention Istio in this introduction, or (better!) we should find a way to explain canary rollouts without depending on Istio.

---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: canary-app-deployment-v2
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: canary-app
      version: v2
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: canary-app
        version: v2
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: canary-app
          image: <your Docker Hub username>/canary-app:v2
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: canary-app-service
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    app: canary-app
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 80
```

This Kubernetes manifest deploys two different apps, `canary-app:v1`, `canary-app:v2`
and a single service for both of the apps. The service is exposed via a `LoadBalancer`.

To access the application running inside the pod you need to get the IP of the
load balancer. To get the IP of load balancer simply run `kubectl get services`
you will see the `canary-app-service` of type `LoadBalancer`. This IP will be used
in the next command. And if you are using Minikube and see the IP of load balancer
is in pending state, just run the `minikube tunnel` command in the background.
And then run `kubectl get services`.

> {{< figure src="load-balancer-ip.png" alt="A screenshot of a terminal window showing external IP of load balancer service." >}}

Reviewer 2: Can we use text here rather than a screenshot?

Now run this command to make requests to the load-balancer
(replace the ip of the load-balancer in the command):

```bash
for i in {1..10}; do curl <ip of load-balancer service>; done
```

After running this command you will get a similar output like the following.

> {{< figure src="curl-to-load-balancer.png" alt="A screenshot of terminal window showing output of making CURL request to the load balancer. The output contains `Hello from app-v1` 4 times and `Hello from app-v2` 6 times">}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="curl-to-load-balancer.png" alt="A screenshot of terminal window showing output of making CURL request to the load balancer. The output contains 'Hello from app-v1' 4 times and 'Hello from app-v2' 6 times" >}}
```

Can we use text here rather than a screenshot?

Kubernetes networking tries to equally distribute the traffic across the pods. At first
it may seem like the traffic is not getting distributed equally. But over a larger
number of requests traffic gets distributed equally. If you increase the values of
the `replicas` to the `9` for the `canary-app:v1`. 90% of the traffic will go towards the
`canary-app:v1` and the remaining 10% traffic will go towards the `canary-app:v2`.

Here is the output after changing the value:

> {{< figure src="9-1-traffic-split.png" alt="A screenshot of a terminal window showing output of making CURL request to the load balancer. The output contains `Hello from app-v1` 9 times and `Hello from app-v2` a single time" >}}

Reviewer 2: Can we use text here rather than a screenshot? It is easier to maintain text.
